okay here is lecture 10 in linear
algebra uh two important things to do in
this lecture one is to correct an error
from lecture
nine so the Blackboard with that awful
error is still with us and the second
the big thing to do is to tell you about
the four
subspaces that come with a matrix we've
seen two subspaces the column space and
the null space there's two to go okay
first of all and this is a great way to
recap and correct the previous
lecture so you remember I was just doing
R3 I couldn't have taken a simpler
example than
R3 and I wrote down the standard basis
that that's the standard
basis that basis the obvious basis for
the whole three-dimensional space and
then I wanted to make the point that
there was nothing special
nothing about that basis that another
basis couldn't have it could have linear
Independence it could span a space there
are lots of other bases so I started
with these vectors 112 and 225 and those
were
independent and then I said 337 wouldn't
do because 337 is the sum of those so in
my innocence I put in
338 I figured probably if 337 is on the
plane is which I know it's in the plane
with these two then probably 338 sticks
a little bit out of the plane and it's
independent and it gives a basis but
after
class to my
sorrow student tells me wait a minute
that B that third Vector 338 is not
independent and why did she say that she
didn't
actually take the time didn't have to to
find what combination of this one and
this one gives 338
she did something
else in other words she looked ahead
because she said wait a minute if I look
at that
matrix it's not
invertible that third column can't be
independent of the first two because
when I look at that matrix it's got two
identical
rows I have a square
Matrix its rows are obviously dependent
and that makes the columns
dependent so there's my error when I
look at the Matrix a that has those
three
columns those three columns can't be
independent because that Matrix is not
invertible because it's got two equal
rows and today's lecture will con reach
the conclusion the great conclusion
that
connects the column space with the row
space so those are the row space is now
going to be another one of my
fundamental subspaces the row space of
this Matrix or of this one well the row
space of this one is
okay but the row space of this one I'm
looking at the rows of the Matrix oh
anyway I'll have two equal rows
and the row space will be only two
dimensional the rank of the Matrix with
these columns will only be two so only
two of those columns columns can be
independent
too the rows tell me something about the
columns in other words something that I
should have noticed and I didn't okay so
now let me pin down these four
fundamental
subspaces so here are the four fun FAL
subspaces this is really the heart of
this approach to linear algebra to see
these four subspaces how they're related
so what are they the column
space c of a the null
space inovate
and now comes the row space something
new the row space what's in
that it's all combinations of the
rows that's natural we want a space so
we have to take all combinations and we
start with the rows so the rows span the
row space are the rows a basis for the
row
space maybe so maybe
no the row are a basis for the row space
when they're independent but if they're
dependent as in
this example my error from last
time they're not those three rows are
not a basis the row space would would
only be two dimensional I only need two
rows for a basis so the row space now
what's in it it's all combinations of
the rows of a all
combinations of the rows of
a but I don't like working with row
vectors all my vectors have been column
vectors I'd like to stay with column
vectors how can I get to column
vectors out of these rows I transpose
The Matrix so if that's okay with you
I'm going to transpose The Matrix and
I'm going to say all
combinations of the columns
of a
transpose and that allows me to use the
convenient
notation the column space of a
transpose nothing no mathematics went on
there we just got some vectors that were
lying down to stand up but it means that
we can use this Colum space of a
transpose that's telling me in a nice
Matrix
notation what the row space
is okay and
finally is another null space the fourth
ve the fourth fundamental space will be
the null space of a transpose the fourth
guy is the null
space of a transpose
and of course my notation is n of a
transpose that's the null space of a
transpose yeah we don't have a perfect
name for this space as us as a
connecting with a but our usual name is
the left null space and I'll show you
why in a moment so often I call this the
just to write that word the
left null
space of
a so just the way we have the row space
of a and we switch it to the column
space of a transpose so we have this
space of guys that I call the left null
space of a but the good notation is it's
the null space of a transpose okay those
are for
spaces where are those
spaces what what big space are they in
for when a is m
byn in that case the null space of
a what's in the null space of a vectors
with n components solutions to ax equals
z so the null's space of a is n
RN what's in the column space of a well
columns how many components do those
columns have
M so this column space is in
r
m what about the column space of a
transpose which are just a disguised way
of saying the rows of
a the rows of a in this 3x6 Matrix have
six
components n components these the column
spaces n r
n and the null space of a
transpose I see that this fourth space
is already
getting second you know second class
citizen treatment and it doesn't deserve
it it it should be there it is there and
shouldn't be squeezed the null space of
a
transpose well if the null space of a
had vectors with n components the null
space of a transposed will be in
RM I want to draw a picture of the four
spaces
okay okay here are the four spaces
okay let me
put n dimensional space over on this
side then which were the subspaces in RN
the null space was and the row space was
so here we have the can I make that
picture of the row
space and can I make this kind of
picture of the null
space that's just meant to be a sketch
to remind you that they're in this which
how what type of vectors are in it
vectors with n components over here in
in
inside consisting of vectors with M
components is the column space
and what I'm calling
the null space of a transpose those are
the ones with M
components
okay to understand these spaces is our
is our job now because by understanding
those spaces we know everything about
this half of linear
algebra what do I mean by understanding
those spaces I would like to know a
basis for those
spaces for each one of those spaces how
would I create construct a basis what
systematic way would produce a
basis and what's their
Dimension
okay so for each of the four spaces I
have to answer those
questions how do I produce a basis and
then which has a somewhat long
answer and what's the
dimension which is just a number so it
has a real short answer can I give you
the short answer first I shouldn't do it
but here it is I can tell you the
dimension of the column
space let me start with this guy what's
its Dimension I have an M byn Matrix the
dimension of the column
space is the
rank
R we actually got to that at the end of
the last lecture but only for an example
so I really have to
say okay what's going on there I should
produce a
basis and then I just look to see how
many vectors I needed in that basis and
the answer will be
R actually I'll do that before I get on
to the
others what's a basis for the column
space that we've done all the work of
row
reduction identifying the pivot columns
the ones that have pivots the ones that
end up with pivots but now I the pivot
columns I'm interested in are columns of
a the original a
and those pivot columns there are R of
them the rank R counts those those are a
basis so if I answer this question for
the column
space the answer will be a basis is the
pivot
columns and the dimension is the rank
R and there are pivot columns and
everything great okay so that space we
pretty well
understand I probably have a little
going back to see that to
prove that this is a right answer but
you know it's the right answer now let
me look at the row
space
okay shall I tell you the dimension of
the row
space yes before we do even an example
let me tell you the dimension of the row
row space its Dimension is also R the
row space and the column space have the
same Dimension that's a wonderful fact
the
dimension of the column space of a
transpose that's the row space is
r that that space is R
dimensional and so is this
one
okay that's the that's the sort of
insight that got used in this example if
those if those if those are the three
columns of a matrix let me make them the
three columns of a matrix by just
erasing some
brackets okay those are the three
columns of a
matrix the rank of that Matrix if I look
at the columns it wasn't obvious to me
anyway but if I look at the rows it's
now it's
obvious the row space of that Matrix
obviously is two-dimensional because I
can I I see a basis for the row space
this row and that row and of course
strictly speaking I'm supposed to
transpose those guys make them stand
up but the rank is two and therefore the
column space is two-dimensional by this
wonderful fact that the row space and
column space have the same Dimension and
therefore there are only two pivot
columns not three
and uh those the three columns are
dependent okay now let
me bury that
error and talk about the row
space well I'm going to give you the
dimensions of all the spaces because
that's the the such a nice
answer okay so let me come back
here so we have this great fact to
establish
that the row space the its Dimension is
also the
rank okay what about the null
space what's the basis for the null
space what's the dimension of the null
space let me I'll put that answer up
here for the null
space well how how have we constructed
the null
space we took the Matrix
a we did those row operations to get it
into a form U or or even further we got
it into the reduced form
R and then we read off special
Solutions special Solutions and every
special solution came from a free
variable and those special Solutions are
in the null space and the great thing is
there are a basis for it so for the null
space a basis will be the special
Solutions and there's one for every free
variable right for each free variable we
give that variable the value one the
other free variable zero we get the
pivot variables we get a a vector in the
in we get a special
solution so we get allog together n
minus r of them CU that's the number
of free variabl
if we have
R this is this is the dimension is R is
the number of pivot variables this is
the number of free variables so the
beauty is that those special Solutions
do form a
basis and tell us immediately that the
dimension of the null
space is
n i better write this well because it's
so nice n minus r and you see the nice
thing that the two dimensions in this n
dimensional space one Subspace is R
dimensional to be proved that's the row
space the other Subspace is n minus r
dimensional that's the null
space and the two Dimensions like
together give n the sum of R and N minus
r is n and that's just great it it it's
really copying the fact that we have n
variables R of them our pivot variables
and N minus r free variables and N all
together okay and now what's the
dimension of
this poor Mis begotten fourth
Subspace it's got to
be M minus r the
dimension of this left null space left
out practically is M minus
r well that's really just saying that
this again the sum of that plus that is
M and M is correct it's the number of
columns in a
transpose a transpose is just as good a
matrix is
a it just happens to
be n by m it happens to have M columns
so it will have
M variables when I go to ax equals z and
M of them and and R of them will be
pivot variables and M minus r will be
free
variables it a transposes as good a
matrix as a it follows the same rule
that the this plus the dimension this
Dimension plus this Dimension adds up to
the number of
columns and over here a transpose has M
columns
okay okay so I gave you the easy answer
the
dimensions now can
I go back to check on a
basis we would like to think that say
the row
space because we've got a basis for the
column space
the pivot columns give a basis for the
column space now I'm asking you to look
at the row space and I you could say
okay I can produce a basis for the row
Space by transposing my Matrix making
those columns then doing elimination row
reduction and checking out the pivot
columns in this transposed Matrix but
that means you had to do all that row
reduction on a
transpose it ought to be possible if we
take a matrix
a let me take the Matrix maybe we had
this Matrix in the last lecture 1 one
one 2 1 2 3 2 3 one one
one okay that that Matrix was so easy we
spotted its pivot columns one and two
without actually doing row reduction but
now let's do the job
properly so I subtract this away from
this to produce a zero so 1 2 3 1 is
fine subtracting that away leaves me
min-1 - one Z right and subtracting that
from the last row oh well that's
easy okay I'm doing row
reduction now I've the First Column is
all set the second column I now see the
pivot and I can clean up if I uh
actually
okay why don't I make the pivot into a
one I'll multiply that row through by by
minus one and then I have one
one that was an elementary operation I'm
allowed multiply a row by a number and
now I'll do elimination two of those
away from that we'll knock this guy out
and make this into a one so that's now a
zero and that's a
one okay done that's
R I'm seeing the identity Matrix here
I'm seeing Zer below and I'm seeing F
there
okay what about its row space
what happened to its row space well what
Happ let me first ask just because this
sometimes something does happen its
column space
changed the column space of
R is not the column space of a
right because 111 is certainly in the
column space of a and certainly not in
the column space of
r i did row operations
those row operations preserve the row
space so the row so the column spaces
are different different column spaces
different column
spaces but I believe that they have the
same row
space same row space
I believe that the row space of that
Matrix and the row space of this Matrix
are identical they have exactly the same
vectors in
them those vectors are vectors with four
components
right they're all combinations of those
rows or I believe you get the same thing
by taking all combinations of these
rows and if
true what's a basis
what's a basis for the row space of R
and it'll be a basis for the row space
of the original
a but it's obviously a basis for the row
space of R what's a basis for the row
space of that Matrix the first two
rows so a basis for the row so a basis
is for the row
space of a or of R
is is the
first R
rows of R not of
a sometimes it's true for a but not
necessarily but R we definitely
have a matrix here who row space we can
we can
identify the row space is spanned by the
three
rows but if we want a basis we want
independence so out goes Row three the
Bas the row space is also spanned by the
first two rows this guy didn't
contribute anything and of course over
here this 1 two 3 1 and the bottom
didn't contribute anything we had it
already so th this here's a basis
one11 and
0110 I believe those are in the row
space I know they're independent why are
they in the row
space why are those two vectors in the
row space because all those operations
we did which started with these
rows and took combinations of them I
took this row minus this
row that gave me something that's still
in the row space that's the point when I
took a a row minus a multiple of another
row I'm staying in the row space the row
space is not
changing my little basis for it is
changing and I've ended up with uh sort
of the best
basis if The Columns of the identity
Matrix are the best basis for R3 or
RN the rows of this Matrix are the best
basis for the row space best in the
sense of being as clean as I can make it
starting off with the identity and then
finishing up with whatever has to be in
there okay do you see then that the
dimension is R for sure because we've
got our
pivots our nonzero rows we've got the
right number of vectors R they're in the
row space they're in
independent that's it they are a basis
for the row space and we can even pin
that down further how do I know that
every row of a is a combination how do I
know they span the row
space Oh well somebody says I've got the
right number of them so they must but
that and that's true but let me just say
how do I know that this row is a
combination of
these by just reversing the steps of row
reduction if I just reverse the steps
and go from a from R back to
a then what do I what am I doing I'm
starting with these rows I'm taking
combinations of
them after a couple of steps undoing the
subtractions that I did before I'm back
to these rows so these rows are
combinations of those rows those rows
are combinations of those rows the two
row spaces are the same the bases are
the
same and the natural basis is this guy
is that all right for the row
space the row space is sitting there in
R in its cleanest possible
form okay now what about the fourth
guy the null space of a transpose
first of all why do I call that the left
null space so let
me save that and bring that
down
okay so the fourth
space is the null space of a
transpose so it got it has in it vectors
let me call them y so that a transpose
yal
0 if a transpose y equals 0 then Y is in
the null space of a transpose of
course so this is a
matrix time a column
equaling
Z and now because I want y to sit on the
left and I want a instead of a
transpose I I'll just transpose that
equation can I just transpose
that on the right it makes the zero
Vector lie
down and on the
left that's a product a a transpose time
y if I take the transpose then they come
in opposite order right so it's y
transpose time a transpose
transpose but nobody's going to leave it
like that that's a transpose transpose
is just a of course when I transposed a
transpose I got back to a now do you see
what I have now I have a row
Vector y
transpose multiplying
a and multiplying from the left that's
why I call it the left null
space but by making it putting it on the
left I had to make it into a row instead
of a column vector and so my convention
is I usually don't do that I usually
stay with a transpose y equals z okay
and you might
ask how do we get a
basis or I might ask
how do we get a basis for this fourth
space this left null
space okay I'll do it the
example as always ah not that
one the left n space is not jumping out
at me here
the the I know which are the free V free
variables the special Solutions but
those are special solutions to ax equals
z and now I'm looking at a transpose and
I'm not seeing it here so but somehow
you feel that the work that you did
which simplified a to R should have
revealed the left null space
to and it's slightly
less immediate but it's there so from a
to R are I took some steps and I guess
I'm interested in what were those steps
or what were all of them together I
don't I'm not interested in
what particular ones they were I'm
interested in what was the whole Matrix
that took me from a to
R how would you find
that do you remember gaus Jordan
where you tack on the identity
Matrix let's do that again so I I'll do
it above here so this is
now this is now the idea
of I take the Matrix
a which is m
byn in gaus Jordan when we saw them
before a was a square invertible Matrix
and we were finding its inverse
now the Matrix isn't Square it's
probably
rectangular but I'll still tack on the
identity Matrix and of course since
these have length M it better be M by
m and now I'll
do the reduced row Echelon form of this
Matrix
and what do I get
the reduced row Echelon form starts with
these columns starts with the first
columns works like mad and produces
R of course still that same size M byn
and we did it before and
then whatever it did to get R something
else is going to show up
here let me call it
e m by m it's whatever you do you see
that e is just going to contain a record
of what we
did we did whatever it took to get a to
become
R and at the same time we were doing it
to the identity
Matrix so we started with the identity
Matrix we buzzed along so we took
some all this row red reduction amounted
to multiplying on the left by some
Matrix some series of Elementary
matrices that all together gave us one
Matrix and that Matrix is
e so all this row reduction stuff
amounted to multiplying by E how do I
know that it's certainly amounted to
multiply by
something and that something took I to e
so that something was e so now look at
the first part
E A is r
no big deal all I've said
is that
the row reduction steps that we all know
well taking a to
R
are in a in some Matrix and I can find
out what that Matrix is by just tacking
I on and seeing what comes out what
comes out is
e let's just review the invertible
square case what happened
then cuz I was interested in it in
Chapter 2 also when a was square and
invertible I took AI I did row row
elimination what what was the r that
came out it was
I so in chapter two in chapter
two R was
I the row the reduced row Echelon form
of a nice invertible Square Matrix is
the identity so if R was I in that case
then e was then e
was a
inverse because EA is
I good that's that was good and easy now
what I'm saying is that there's still is
an e it's not a inverse anymore because
a is rectangular it hasn't got an
inverse but there is still some Matrix
e that connected this to this oh I
should have figured out in advance what
it
was
shoot I didn't I did those steps and
sort of erased as I
went and uh I should have done them to
the identity too can I do
that can I do that I'll keep the
identity Matrix like I'm supposed to do
and I'll do this same operations on it
and see what I end up with okay so I'm
starting with the identity which I'll
write in
light light enough
but okay what did I do I subtracted that
Row from that one and that Row from that
one okay I'll do that to the identity so
I subtract that first row from row two
and Row three
good then I think I multiply do you
remember remember I multiplied Row Two
by
minus1 let me just do
that then what did I do I
subtracted two of row two away from Row
one I better do that subtract two of
this away from this that's minus one two
of these away leaves a plus two and
zero I believe that's e
the way to check is to see
multiply that e by this a just to see
did I do it
right so I believe e was min-1 2
0 1 - 1
0 and - one 0
1 okay that's my
e that's my a and that's are all
right all I'm struggling to do is right
the reason I wanted this blasted e
was so that I could figure out the left
null
space Not only it's Dimension which I
know actually what is the dimension of
the left null space Here's my
Matrix what's the rank of the Matrix two
and the dimension of the null of the
left null space is supposed to be M - R
3 - 2 1 I believe that the left null
space is onedimensional there is one
combination of those three rows that
produces the zero
row there is a there's a a basis a basis
for
the left no space has only got one
vector in it and what is that Vector
it's here in the L last row of e but ah
we could have seen it earlier what
combination of those rows gives the zero
row minus one of that plus one of
that so A basis for the left null
space of this Matrix I'm looking for
combinations of rows that give the zero
row if I'm looking at the left null
space for the null space I'm looking at
combinations of columns to get the zero
column now I'm look looking at
combinations of these three rows to get
the zero row and of course there is my
zero row and here is my Vector that
produced it minus one of that row and
one of that row obvious okay so in that
example and actually in all examples we
have seen how to produce a basis for the
left null space I won't ask you that all
the
time because it did it it didn't come
out immediately from R we had to keep
track of e for that left null space but
at least it didn't require us to
transpose The Matrix and start all over
again okay those are the four subspaces
can I review
them the row space and the null space
are in RN their Dimensions add to n the
column space and the left null space are
in RM
and their Dimensions add to
M
okay so let me close these last
minutes by pushing you a little bit more
to a
new type of vector
space all our Vector spaces all the ones
that we took seriously have been
subspaces of some real
three or n dimensional space now I'm
going to write down another Vector space
a new Vector
space say
all 3x3
matrices my matri are the
vectors is that all right I'm just
naming them you can put quotes around
vectors every 3x3 Matrix is one of my
vectors now how am I entitled to call
those things vectors and they look very
much like
matrices but they're vectors in my
Vector space because they obey the rules
all I'm supposed to be able to do with
vectors is add them I can add matrices
I'm supposed to be able to multiply them
by scalar numbers like seven well I can
multiply a matrix by
seven and that and I can take
combinations of matrices I can take
three of one Matrix minus five of
another Matrix and those combinations
there's a zero Matrix The Matrix that
has all zeros in it if I add that to
another Matrix it doesn't change it all
the good stuff if multiply matrix by one
it doesn't change it all those eight
rules for a vector space that we never
wrote down all easily
satisfied so now we have a
different now of course you can say you
can multiply those
matrices I don't care for the moment I'm
only thinking of these matrices as
forming a vector space so I am only
doing a plus b
and C * a I'm not interested in a for
now the fact that I can multiply is not
relevant to the to a vector space okay
so I have 3x3
matrices and how about
subspaces what's tell me a Subspace of
this Matrix space let me call the this
Matrix space
m that's my Matrix space my space of all
3x3 matrices tell me a Subspace of
it okay uh what about the tri upper
triangular matrices so
subspaces
subspaces of
M all all upper triangular matrices
another Subspace all symmetric
matrices the intersection of two
subspaces is supposed to be a Subspace
we gave a little effort to the proof of
that fact if I look at the matrices that
are in this Subspace they're symmetric
and they're also in this Subspace
they're upper
triangular what do they look
like well if they're symmetric but they
have zeros below the diagonal they
better have zeros above the diagonal so
the intersection would be diagonal
matrices that's another
Subspace smaller than
those how can I use the word
smaller well I'm now entitled to use the
word smaller I mean
well one way to say is okay these are
contained in those these are contained
in those but more precisely I could give
the dimension of these
spaces so I could we can compute let's
compute it next time the dimension of
all upper of the Subspace of upper
triangular 3x3 matrices the dimension of
symmetric 3x3 matrices the dimension of
diagonal 3x3 matrices
well to produce Dimension that means I'm
supposed to produce a
basis and then I just count how many
Vector how many I needed in the basis
let me give you the answer for this one
what's the dimension the dimension of
this say this Subspace let me call it D
all diagonal matrices the
dimension of
this Subspace
is as I write you're working it out
three because here's
a
matrix in this it's a diagonal matrix
here's another
one here's another
one better make a diagonal let me put a
seven
there that was not a very great choice
but it's three diagonal
matrices and I believe that they're a
basis I believe that those three
matrices are
independent and I believe that any
diagonal matrix is a combination of
those three so they span the Subspace of
diagonal
matrices do you see that idea it's like
stretching the idea from RN to r n byn
3x3
but if we can still add we can still
multiply by numbers and we just ignore
the fact that we can multiply two
matrices together okay thank you that's
lecture 10